## Statement of Use

A philosophy is incapable of being "useful" unless it must come under the
jurisdiction of use at some point in the life-cycle of its constituent concepts
or the concepts piled atop it.

The life-cycle of a concept is formed of two parts: the co-opting of the concept
for certain uses at the same level of abstraction, and the use of that concept
or its co-opters as a rung in a ladder proceeding towards action. Thus, there is
a hierarchy of concepts from the most esoteric and distant from action, to those
that are closer to action. A concept such as the Object, from whose relations is
derived logic, can influence the formation of a concept of epistemology, which
forms the basis of the concept of science, a concept which is *used* for the
gathering of knowledge. Then the life cycle starts again: through the build-up
of a great many concepts, the knowledge collected by science is *used* to create
technology, which is then used in everyday action. Thus, the philosophy of the
Object can be "useful": it comes under the jurisdiction of use through its
life-cycle twice.

Thus, even the most abstract concepts can eventually become *used* for action.
So you see, for a philosophy (primarily - its constituent concepts), usefulness
is made possible by whether anything can be piled atop it in order to aid or
hinder, guide or direct action.

**Nota bene:** this does not imply, at this stage, that the concept *is*
useful - that would imply that the concept is correct - but only that it *can
be* useful. Has the possibility to be.

Most philosophy, especially metaphysics, is not capable of being useful. This is
because it does not change the actions that must be taken, either directly, or
through any outgrowth of ethics or epistemology. This is especially true of
Cartaesian skepticism, which posits such a fundamental disconnect between mind
and world that it is impossible for anything "useful" to come of it.

Why do something that is of no use? Humans only do things that seem of no use
because either they have an ancillary use - this is so in the case of leisure -
or because they may have some sort of use in the far future - further on in
their life-cycle - and both of these circumstances are an instance of
*investment in the future,* not "doing" for its own sake. There is no reason to
do something that is of totally no use. It is a waste of time and energy.

Thus, if something can be proven to be incapable of falling under the
jurisdiction of use, there is no reason to wrestle with it besides the
ancillary - this is philosophy-as-leisure, which has its own place - or because
we hope that it might have some use that we do not or cannot see (through
unknown unknowns). This last is a vain hope in most cases, especially if, as I
have said before, the useless incapability is known or proven. I do not intend
to take this metaphysician's route.

I will take a different route: I will construct the starting-place of my
philosophy in the consciousness of the individual, with an eye towards reality
and epistemology and ethics, so that it will be guaranteed to guide action in
some way - so that it is possible that it can be "useful," even if it turns out
not to be - since I have a focus on life and action, and do not find metaphysics
leisurely.

Said another way: I intend to do philosophy so that my results must come under
the jurisdiction of use at some point in the life-cycle of its constituent
concepts or the concepts piled atop it.

## Section 1

### The Existence of the External World

Consciousness only exists in virtue of being conscious *of* something; something
which exists prior to or outside of the consciousness itself, since to be
conscious of itself without a prior subject is to be conscious of something
which has not come into being yet, i.e. is impossible. This "something" then is
prior to and external to consciousness and clearly not controlled by it - we
would know if reality was controlled by our own perceptions of it - so, whatever
its metaphysical origin (material, ideal, monadic, an evil daemon), we can call
it "the world."

Whether it is truly real, it is an external fact which we must act in accordance
with, so its philosophical reality is immaterial - literally.

### Detail-Elision Theory of Concept-Formation

How do we understand and speak about this world? (The two are really the same:
how do you truly understand that which you are not capable of explaining?)
Through firstly the use of concepts. Concepts are formed through the intimate
interaction between consciousness - which we know is a pattern-seeker - and its
envelope; they represent patterns of objects that are similar: this they do by
selecting the unchanging aspects of the objects and eliding the changing or
unimportant details. For example: "dog" and "cat** are concepts formed by the
elision of some details of the real-world objects.

**Nota bene:** concepts cannot be formed unless one has two or more examples of
the class of object one wishes to categorize - both for the concept to be
useful, and for it to be possible for one to know which details are important or
unchanging among the class, and which are not.

Which concepts are chosen by the pattern-seeker of consciousness depends on
which ones are more useful categories for thinking in the environment around the
consciousness; this is why discussion is so important: sharing concepts that
were formed by one group, which had not been formed by the other, with the
other, in its station as interlocutor.

### Reference Theory of Meaning

Speaking of discussion, this leads me to language. Language is formed by words
and sentences; I am interested here, initially, in words and verbs - words which
by virtue of reference are meaningful.

What gives words their reference-meaning? The agreement between pattern-seekers
who use that word. An arrangement of syllables does not, after all,
spontaneously acquire meaning in our minds simply by virtue of its innate sound.
Just look at a truly foreign language and ask yourself if any of these words
mean anything to you by themselves - and you will see what I mean. It is not the
word itself, but the "linguistic tacit contract" of a society that grants
reference (and thus **meaning**) to words.

**Nota bene:** Once this contract is established, of course, it can be made
explicit throught he use of dictionaries, but *not* before.

But what do these words refer to? Proper nouns refer to specific things with no
detail purposefully elided, but otherwise these words *refer* to concepts.

### The Method of Concept Abstraction

This might seem somewhat limiting at first - a roundabout way of reinventing
Wittgenstein or logical positivism - since words seem now to have to refer only
to classes of physical things (or events), but this is why I must now introduce
a complication: concepts (which words refer to) may also be formed by a
detail-elision applied to other concepts, so that all concepts are based
ultimately on reality, but at many possible *levels of abstraction.* So from dog
and cat to mammal, vertebrate, and then animal.

### Sense & Reference

Another complication is necessary, this time to the meaning of words themselves:
words have not only reference but sense to contribute to their meaning; sense is
what a word contributes to a statement beyond its actual reference, and also
what the speaker thinks *about* the referant of the word.

An example: Oedipus' mother, Jocasta, and Oedipus' wife (tragically) all refer
to the same person - the same concrete concept, we might say - but they seem to
mean different things because they contribute different ideas about referant.

Another example: the morning star and the evening star are the same star, but
each word has a different surrounding context for the speaker, so they carry
different sense.


### Statements and the Concept Theory of Conjunctions

What about sentences, then? What are they in relation to this structure of
meaning? They are relations: they relate the situation or meaning of the
concept-words that they are composed of using other more general concepts, which
we call operators or conjunctions; these conjunctions are formed by eliding
details about the specific situation and objects of certain common relations
which we observe between objects int he world outside.

Among these we find: cause and effect, simultaneity - our entire sense of time,
in fact - and also the operations known as the laws of logic, which represent
perhaps the most abstract concepts of all.

### Analytic & Synthetic

As Kant says, there are two different kinds of relations between concepts, which
he termed "analytic" and "synthetic": analytic sentences are those that explain
or spin-out the implications of concepts themselves, showing how other concepts
result from them or are contained within them already - a bachelor is unmarried,
to use a cliche example - while synthetic statements examine the relationship
between two concepts separately derived - such as that the street is wet after
it rains - a relationship which is usually not necessary in all cases, since the
relationship must be observed separately from either concept.

### Developmental Theory of Reality

Unlike Kant, I do not think that there are any real concepts which we need to
perceive at all; infants come into the word not yet comprehending basic things
such as object permanence, time, or cause and effect, or even the laws of logic
(this is why peek-a-boo and such simple games are a delight to them**, but learn
them through experience of reality.

This is not to say that we are *tabula rasa* - far from it! For, we come into
being primed with a mechanism of forming concepts and learning language.

How do we know that our concepts and thought-patterns are capable of being
correct, if they are derived through the faulty mediation of the sense and our
fallible minds? We know that we do make mistakes often, but if our knowledge
capabilities were entirely divorced from reality they would be of no use to us.

We evolved in an environment where something so resource-consuming as a large
brain capable of complex thought like the one we of the *Homo* genus developed
was a huge disadvantage. We would not have developed it, and would certainly not
have maintained it, unless it was of some benefit to us - and moreover! of a
great benefit to us: enough to make up for the calorie loss and the difficulty
in birthing which causes greater mortality rates in mothers and children.

How did this great big brain help us, then? If it was useless for guiding
action, it would do nothing for us in the action-filled world of nature. No, it
guides action, and usefully, too. Usefully means: in accordance with reality.
And how does it guide action? By forming general concepts and applying them. So
incorrectly formed concepts might work in the situation in which they were
formed, but they would not work even in a similar situation - wrong concepts
would the creation of "over-fitting" and would work only in the situation where
they were observed, not the situation with similar enough features that correct
concepts would apply.

We developed also in an environment where correct action was needed to survive
and incorrect action was harshly punished, so that those whose ability to form
concepts wasn't good enough, who formed them too few or too incorrectly, died
quickly, while those better succeeded and passed their genetic code down.

Thus over time, through the pressures of a reality which punishes acting against
its logic, because our concepts mediate our interaction with reality and thus
our actions, and because our actions were the arbiter of our survival and
development through reproduction, the capability for understanding the world
correctly - so that we could act correctly - was born.

Evolution does not produce anything perfect, however, so we are saddled with
cognitive biases: relation-concepts such as *post hoc ergo propter hoc* and
confirmation bias, which we used confidently in our reasoning because they
seemed correct to use, because it wasn't necessary for our survival for
evolution to cull them.

However, when we learned that these fallacies were not compatible with our more
basic and useful relation-concepts, and when we learned further, using tools we
ourselves developed consciously - using our concept formation utility against
its natural progenitor - that these concept-relations did not guide action well
and truly, we cataloged them and put up WANTED signs for them, to remind
ourselves often to avoid them. Thus we have a self-correcting faculty.

### The "OBJECT"

Through this connection to reality which I have described, we can with time know
which parts of our concept group apply to reality and us, and which only seem
to. That is how we can know that reality acts by logic: the common features of
objects, which we carefully and correctly observe, which form the concept of
Object itself, to us necessitate the action of the Laws of Logic, and these
general conceptual features are so general that they would apply to any object
whatever that we would recognize as an object - we know from the details of the
concept of Object that the laws of logic are true for it, and thus for
everything in our world.

Let me explain it another way: we have a method of, when we are careful,
correctly abstracting concepts, first from our empirical experiences, and
thence from each other. If we proceed up a hierarchy of concepts formed from
detail-elision, to the very top of what we would recognize as a concept that
could be unambiguously applied to objects in the world, to the most abstract
thing that still has ontological and material being, we call this concept
Object.

This concept itself, still contains a few details. Very few indeed, but I
profess that I could count three among them, that anything which we could
recognize as "real" must follow:

1. The Law of Non-Contradiction
2. The Law of Identity
3. The Law of The Excluded Middle

Note that I only use Aristotle's Three, and do not give Schopenhauer his fourth,
the principle of Sufficient Reason, which can be stated thusly: "Of everything
that is, it can be found why it is." This is not obvious to me, nor can it be
justified in my framework of the Object.

Anything within this Universe, which has physical reality as we recognize it,
must follow these laws. Thus, reality is rational: I can be sure that any
object, so long as it has a physical nature, will follow these rules, no matter
what it is or whether it is known or unknown - and no matter where it is
located, since the actions of the object found come from details in itself
abstracted out to the level of the Object, not details of its surrounding
envelope.

As an example: I can be assured that if I were to land on another planet, I
would find that the planet is not also an egg. It would follow the law of
Identity. I would find that it either exists or does not exist. It would follow
the law of non-contradiction and the law of the excluded middle. I do not need
to worry, as Lovecraft does, that at some remote region of space, all laws break
down - for, space itself is an entity under the heading of the concept Object,
and anything that I would find there that was physical, which I could interact
with and perceive, would fall under the heading of Object as well.

Most spiritual objects would also follow these three laws, meaning that it would
be possible for them to fall under the concept of Object, however, there are
some concepts that do not, such as the Christian Trinity. Thus, I will restrict
my notes here to simply physical things, which are all that we have direct sense
of in reality anyway.

Of course, this notion does not entirely rule out some strange otherworldly
metaphysical plane, which since it would not have physical reality in common
with the other objects which we used as the empirical basis for our derivation
of the Object, would not have to follow logical rules. But it would not be
located in spacetime, but would necessarily be located in some orthogonal
universe, and I would raise the question of whether we could interact with or
perceive of objects that Object does not apply to.

We can - as I said before - conceive of such objects, but only at an extremely
abstract level, without true understanding like what it would require to truly
conceptualize what it would be like to interact with such a thing; the Christian
Trinity, for instance, is "understandable** at a highly abstract level, as being
three person that are in actuality one person, but no Christian truly
comprehends what this means: they simply string words together, and comprehend
aspects, not the whole concept.

**Nota bene:** the laws of identity and non-contradiction are fundamental for
the operation of thought and communication at all, even though they are not
totally ontologically certain, and as I have said can partially be conceived
otherwise. This is why they are "axioms" which cannot be denied without first
being assumed in the denial: in fact, even the thoughts which attempt to
perceive if these laws are otherwise for specific objects use these laws for the
understanding and description of these objects. I am not at this moment totally
certain how this frames the notion of the Object concept, except to posit that
perhaps the reason these ideas are so fundamental to our thought is because they
are so fundamental to reality (as we have seen, our thought is connected to
reality) and concepts *qua* concepts (as we have seen). Maybe these are so baked
into our minds because of how baked into our reality they are.

### A Priori concepts

One implication of all this is that there is no such thing as a truly *a priori*
concept - if there was, it would not possess any necessary connection to
reality.

Instead, most things that seem *a priori* are simply highly reified and
culturally/socially imparted or empirically experienced with phenomonological
force (see section two) rule-concepts relating to the Object.

The rest of *a priori* ideas, such as they are - and it is a small burden to
bear for the concept of *a priori* - are derived from the experience of
ancestors through the mediator of action and the scorekeeper of development.

This means that rationalism, proceeding from one proper concept to another in a
manner commonly referred to as *a priori* synthetic, is simply the working-out
of the most fundamental emperical truths we are capable of grasping; *a priori*
synthetic truths are thus just as - and likely more - related to reality as
scientifically determined observations, and more likely to give a correct causal
model of what is happening "behind the curtain of experience." We will speak of
these things more in depth later, though.

## Section 2

### Why correct knowledge is important

Rational knowledge is knowledge ordered by the laws of the Object concept - i.e.
ordered by correct hierarchies of concepts and correct relations between them
through the laws of logic.

**Nota bene:** To this basis can be added further rules as the relation-concepts
applicable to these constituent concepts in play require, but it is necessary to
always keep in mind that these other laws - specific to the situation, usually
empirically observed apart from the Object itself - are not as binding or as
fundamental or as certain. If any specific relation-concept does not follow the
laws of logic, then it is inconsistent with its own more abstract essence, and
must be discarded.

Why must inconsistent knowledge be discarded? Because inconsistent knowledge is
not knowledge at all. It does not indicate which prong of the contradiction
should be selected, and it cannot provide an underlying causal model of both
aspects at once. Inconsistent knowledge must be reconciled, or it is
undecidable.

We need knowledge with a proper causal model because only a causal model can
present the mechanism of action and reaction an understanding of which is
necessary to guide action: if one does not know what results - or even, at an
extreme, is possible to result - from actions, how can one choose between them
to achieve results? How can one act with any logic other than randomly?

One might say "I will act randomly in order to *find out* what these actions
do." This is what babies do, and in a way what scientists do as well - we will
discuss that subject later - but that is random action in the pursuit of
*forming* a proper causal model of reality. One cannot go without one forever,
willfully ignoring the causes and effects one sets in motion, and be said to be
acting other than randomly and thus without hope of causing anything desired to
come about.

Thus rational knowledge is required for action in pursuit of any goal - i.e. for
living - in the long run.

Furthermore it is universally a proper and beneficial endeavor to expand and
test a causal model and rational knowledge: to test, because one must know where
the blind-spots of a model are - what it does not explain, does not predict, or
predicts incorrectly - to know how to improve it, but also to avoid acting
incorrectly and to avoid being surprised by outcomes; to expand, because more
far-reaching causal models don't only make action-outcomes better known
beforehand and thence allow better action, but because this expansion opens new
and unpredictable avenues of knowledge themselves.

### stable & unstable equilibria

Reality - the structure of it, by virtue of the essence/concept of the Object -
is, as we have discussed previously, governed by the laws of logic. If A is
true, A is indeed the case; and if A is the case, B cannot also be the case at
the same time and in the same way; and further: either A is the case or it is
not. Moreover, if A and B are mutually exclusive but mutually cover the whole
space of possibilities, C cannot be the case, and so on.

All this does not in the least mean, however, that reality must be *interacted**
with in perfectly logical ways - otherwise all action would necessarily be in
line with reality, or correct, and there would be no need for learning, since we
would all be omniscient, at least about the laws of nature - one can indeed act
as if B is true, even if A is. One can act as if the laws of logic do not apply:
as if an A is not an A, or as if a B is an A, or as if there are no As nor Bs.

**Nota bene:** all except the law of Non-Contradiction. This law is special, in
that one cannot actually act as if two contradictory things are true *at once*:
if A entails action X, and B Y, one cannot do both X and Y at the same moment.
Of course, in the real course of events there might be a middle-of-the-road
action, seemingly. But this is only true for two structures: one, if the third
action (Z) is a compound action, part of which is correct for A and part for B;
or two, if there is a spectrum from A to B. One can at various times act as if A
is true, and various other times as if it is B that is true, however, because
one holds both as true at once.

Although one can mistake reality conceptually - even so far as ignoring the LNC
in thought - and act mistakenly in light of these thoughts (since thought is an
ineradicable prerequisite for most action, and unconscious concepts for all
others), reality itself, being logical in essence, will re-assert itself.

Reassertion takes a myriad of forms, but generally: those actions not in line
with reality will fail - if predicated on a totally impossible conception,
totally; if on an only partially mistaken conception, partially (and often,
thanks to the subtility of knowledge, in strange and difficult-to-understand
ways.) Therefore a timeline of compound actions taken based on an erroneous
conception of reality will often - sometimes slowly, sometimes quickly,
sometimes with the hard abruptness of running into an immovable obstacle - begin
to cause problems for those in the vicinity of the actions as reality reasserts
itself: poisoning even actions taken correctly, either by making them difficult,
or placing reality in a state that makes the rational actions harsh indeed.

Hence, although acting incorrectly can, for a time, seem beneficial to those
effected, in the medium to long term it will come crashing down, or be reduced
to long and grinding ineffectuality, where great effort is expended simply to
beat reality back by occasionally acting rationally, and then reverting back;
this is an unstable equilibrium, and reality will tend over time to force all to
act in accordance with it in one way or another.

Acting against the logic of reality not only corrupts the timeline of action,
making life worse and actions ineffectual - it also hangs the Sword of Damocles
over the heads of the wrongheaded actors: they do not know when, if, or how,
they will run into an impenetrable wall and be dashed on the rocks of logic.
Thus, knowing - and knowingly acting - in tune with reality minimizes risks and
maximizes the long-run effectiveness of actions.

### Ways of knowing properly

To go about gathering knowledge "properly" means that the concepts and relations
derived from the process of gathering must not consistently or randomly wrong
with no hope of correction ,nor are then not guaranteed to have some connection
to reality, nor are they in contradiction with the laws of the Object. Any
method of gathering that falls afoul of these rules is improper.

There are primarily two methods of knowing properly which can be employed by
those desiring possibly-useful knowledge, capable of falling under the
jurisdiction of use.

The first way, which is often called *a priori* reasoning - of both the analytic
and synthetic types - is that which I will henceforth refer to as conceptual
reasoning, since I deny that any truly *a priori* reasoning would have any
connection to reality besides accidentally, and in fact, I don't think such a
thing as *a priori* reasoning actually exists except in the minds of the insane.
We have discussed why.

Conceptual reasoning, in my understanding, is reasoning from simple,
well-understood, widely known empirical experiences or facts; conceptual
reasoning makes use of our understanding of the concepts around us to construct
axioms as starting points - axioms which, if correctly constructed, should be so
completely evident in the essence of phenomonologically immanent concepts that
to deny them would require acknowledging them, pushing back the discussion to
the laws of the Object.

An example of such a statement is Descrates' "cogito ergo sum." It rests on such
a phenomonologically immanent fact - a fact which every facit of related
experience confirms - that to deny it requires the acknowledgment of it for the
very act; this leaves the denier in a state of cognitive dissonance and
contradiction so that to continue to fight would require them to deny the laws
of logic.

This method of knowing is very certain, rooted as it is in few or no
contingencies, and relying only on the reasoning acumen of the philosopher, but
by the same token it is very limited: the range of things that can be axioms and
used as solid foundations is vanishingly small, especially for things that exist
outside the human consciousness, in the world - can you think of any
self-evident axioms that are about non-consciousness- or non-human-centered
things? I for one cannot - and furthermore the complexity of thought and the
strictures of logic required in the reasoning from these axioms severly limits
even what can be done going purely from those paltry few axioms.

Conceptual reasoning can be given "fuel" in the form of empirical knowledge,
however, and this expands its grasp.

All hope is not lost, hwoever: there is another method of knowing, called
"science.** In my rburic it might be called observational reasoning, but here I
have no quarrel with the common term.

**UNFINISHED**
