## Section 2

### Why correct knowledge is important

Rational knowledge is knowledge ordered by the laws of the Object concept - i.e.
ordered by correct hierarchies of concepts and correct relations between them
through the laws of logic.

**Nota bene:** To this basis can be added further rules as the relation-concepts
applicable to these constituent concepts in play require, but it is necessary to
always keep in mind that these other laws - specific to the situation, usually
empirically observed apart from the Object itself - are not as binding or as
fundamental or as certain. If any specific relation-concept does not follow the
laws of logic, then it is inconsistent with its own more abstract essence, and
must be discarded.

Why must inconsistent knowledge be discarded? Because inconsistent knowledge is
not knowledge at all. It does not indicate which prong of the contradiction
should be selected, and it cannot provide an underlying causal model of both
aspects at once. Inconsistent knowledge must be reconciled, or it is
undecidable.

We need knowledge with a proper causal model because only a causal model can
present the mechanism of action and reaction an understanding of which is
necessary to guide action: if one does not know what results - or even, at an
extreme, is possible to result - from actions, how can one choose between them
to achieve results? How can one act with any logic other than randomly?

One might say "I will act randomly in order to *find out* what these actions
do." This is what babies do, and in a way what scientists do as well - we will
discuss that subject later - but that is random action in the pursuit of
*forming* a proper causal model of reality. One cannot go without one forever,
willfully ignoring the causes and effects one sets in motion, and be said to be
acting other than randomly and thus without hope of causing anything desired to
come about.

Thus rational knowledge is required for action in pursuit of any goal - i.e. for
living - in the long run.

Furthermore it is universally a proper and beneficial endeavor to expand and
test a causal model and rational knowledge: to test, because one must know where
the blind-spots of a model are - what it does not explain, does not predict, or
predicts incorrectly - to know how to improve it, but also to avoid acting
incorrectly and to avoid being surprised by outcomes; to expand, because more
far-reaching causal models don't only make action-outcomes better known
beforehand and thence allow better action, but because this expansion opens new
and unpredictable avenues of knowledge themselves.

### stable & unstable equilibria

Reality - the structure of it, by virtue of the essence/concept of the Object -
is, as we have discussed previously, governed by the laws of logic. If A is
true, A is indeed the case; and if A is the case, B cannot also be the case at
the same time and in the same way; and further: either A is the case or it is
not. Moreover, if A and B are mutually exclusive but mutually cover the whole
space of possibilities, C cannot be the case, and so on.

All this does not in the least mean, however, that reality must be *interacted**
with in perfectly logical ways - otherwise all action would necessarily be in
line with reality, or correct, and there would be no need for learning, since we
would all be omniscient, at least about the laws of nature - one can indeed act
as if B is true, even if A is. One can act as if the laws of logic do not apply:
as if an A is not an A, or as if a B is an A, or as if there are no As nor Bs.

**Nota bene:** all except the law of Non-Contradiction. This law is special, in
that one cannot actually act as if two contradictory things are true *at once*:
if A entails action X, and B Y, one cannot do both X and Y at the same moment.
Of course, in the real course of events there might be a middle-of-the-road
action, seemingly. But this is only true for two structures: one, if the third
action (Z) is a compound action, part of which is correct for A and part for B;
or two, if there is a spectrum from A to B. One can at various times act as if A
is true, and various other times as if it is B that is true, however, because
one holds both as true at once.

Although one can mistake reality conceptually - even so far as ignoring the LNC
in thought - and act mistakenly in light of these thoughts (since thought is an
ineradicable prerequisite for most action, and unconscious concepts for all
others), reality itself, being logical in essence, will re-assert itself.

Reassertion takes a myriad of forms, but generally: those actions not in line
with reality will fail - if predicated on a totally impossible conception,
totally; if on an only partially mistaken conception, partially (and often,
thanks to the subtility of knowledge, in strange and difficult-to-understand
ways.) Therefore a timeline of compound actions taken based on an erroneous
conception of reality will often - sometimes slowly, sometimes quickly,
sometimes with the hard abruptness of running into an immovable obstacle - begin
to cause problems for those in the vicinity of the actions as reality reasserts
itself: poisoning even actions taken correctly, either by making them difficult,
or placing reality in a state that makes the rational actions harsh indeed.

Hence, although acting incorrectly can, for a time, seem beneficial to those
effected, in the medium to long term it will come crashing down, or be reduced
to long and grinding ineffectuality, where great effort is expended simply to
beat reality back by occasionally acting rationally, and then reverting back;
this is an unstable equilibrium, and reality will tend over time to force all to
act in accordance with it in one way or another.

Acting against the logic of reality not only corrupts the timeline of action,
making life worse and actions ineffectual - it also hangs the Sword of Damocles
over the heads of the wrongheaded actors: they do not know when, if, or how,
they will run into an impenetrable wall and be dashed on the rocks of logic.
Thus, knowing - and knowingly acting - in tune with reality minimizes risks and
maximizes the long-run effectiveness of actions.

### Ways of knowing properly

To go about gathering knowledge "properly" means that the concepts and relations
derived from the process of gathering must not consistently or randomly wrong
with no hope of correction ,nor are then not guaranteed to have some connection
to reality, nor are they in contradiction with the laws of the Object. Any
method of gathering that falls afoul of these rules is improper.

There are primarily two methods of knowing properly which can be employed by
those desiring possibly-useful knowledge, capable of falling under the
jurisdiction of use.

The first way, which is often called *a priori* reasoning - of both the analytic
and synthetic types - is that which I will henceforth refer to as conceptual
reasoning, since I deny that any truly *a priori* reasoning would have any
connection to reality besides accidentally, and in fact, I don't think such a
thing as *a priori* reasoning actually exists except in the minds of the insane.
We have discussed why.

Conceptual reasoning, in my understanding, is reasoning from simple,
well-understood, widely known empirical experiences or facts; conceptual
reasoning makes use of our understanding of the concepts around us to construct
axioms as starting points - axioms which, if correctly constructed, should be so
completely evident in the essence of phenomonologically immanent concepts that
to deny them would require acknowledging them, pushing back the discussion to
the laws of the Object.

An example of such a statement is Descrates' "cogito ergo sum." It rests on such
a phenomonologically immanent fact - a fact which every facit of related
experience confirms - that to deny it requires the acknowledgment of it for the
very act; this leaves the denier in a state of cognitive dissonance and
contradiction so that to continue to fight would require them to deny the laws
of logic.

This method of knowing is very certain, rooted as it is in few or no
contingencies, and relying only on the reasoning acumen of the philosopher, but
by the same token it is very limited: the range of things that can be axioms and
used as solid foundations is vanishingly small, especially for things that exist
outside the human consciousness, in the world - can you think of any
self-evident axioms that are about non-consciousness- or non-human-centered
things? I for one cannot - and furthermore the complexity of thought and the
strictures of logic required in the reasoning from these axioms severly limits
even what can be done going purely from those paltry few axioms.

Conceptual reasoning can be given "fuel" in the form of empirical knowledge,
however, and this expands its grasp.

All hope is not lost, hwoever: there is another method of knowing, called
"science.** In my rburic it might be called observational reasoning, but here I
have no quarrel with the common term.

**UNFINISHED**

[Prev Section](section1.md)
