---
layout: post
title:  "Section 4 - Aesthetics"
date:   2020-06-2 10:07
categories: section
---

## aesthetics and axiology

Aesthetics is the externalized appreciation of that which we would value for our
own fulfillment. Either we appreciate art because it represents a product of the
fulfillment that we value for ourselves or we appreciate art because it
represents *by meaning in narrative* the fulfillment that we value for
ourselves.

Ergo the relationship between axiology and aesthetics is the relationship
between the fulfillment of the artist and the observer: the kind of fulfillment
specific to the observer, due to his capabilities both human and unique to him,
is represented in the art that he values. If I value intellectual achievement as
my fulfillment, making use of my rational faculty, which is highly developed in
my own essence, like it is in many others, then I will value art that represents
in itself the achievement and result of the intellect of the artist - i.e., I
will value intelligent art. If on the other hand I am one of an artistic bent
myself, who strives for the creation of beauty, or empathy between people, I
will value art that is beautiful, or empathetic - perhaps represents its
characters deeply.

Or, alternatively: the relationship between axiology and aesthetics is the
relationship between the observer's desire for a certain kind of fulfillment and
the fulfillment represented by narrative in the art it observes. Therefore if I
am the kind of man who values bravery, violence, and quick action, perhaps there
is not art that represents the *product* of these things, but there is certainly
art that *represents* these things as a product.

## the meaning of art

The narrative fulfillment represented in a piece of art is what we call its
"meaning," and is composed of two parts: the faculty of the human consciousness
which is required for that fulfillment and the specific way in which that
faculty is used. As a general rule all those who desire a fulfillment by means
of that faculty - by virtue of the fact that they are more highly developed in or
psychologically disposed to the use of it - would find any art that portrays the
use of that faculty with fidelity aesthetically pleasing.

**Nota bene:** fidelity in this case is twofold as well: that the faculty used
to produce this art is well-used to the fullest, and not sloppily done, and that
it accurately represents the fulfillment of the faculty represented by the
narrative, at least how it is imagined in the minds of the viewers (it does not
need to be, nor should it necessarily be, accurate objectively speaking: the
viewers only recognize it as accurate if they recognize it *from their own
conceptions*).

To understand what a narrative represents, one must understand what the literal
text of the narrative says - i.e. what the characters and narrator say, and
which if any of the characters, tied to their viewpoint, the narrative seems to
pick out as the "winner" - and the subtext and metatext are.

Subtext is extremely hard to comprehend - thousands of years of human life-spans
have been spent in hermeneutics often to little consensus - and often
subjective, in the sense that what one person understands to be a subtext from
the text of some narrative might be entirely different from that of another due
to their own context and capacity for interpretation. However, there is still an
objective measure which can be used, if not to create subtexts or deduce them,
at least to rank or rate them: there is a spectrum of reasonableness of
subtextual interpretations, based on how much that interpretation explains from
the narrative text, how much it contradicts, and how tenuous or "long" the chain
of reasoning and redefinition of words and use of symbols pulled from physical
objects in the narrative (and all the other hermeneutical tools) becomes.

The more tenuous an interpretation, the less "valid" it is, because it is less
of a reasonable and accurate understanding of what the narrative text actually
illustrates.

For example: if a narrative portrays two people, Alexander and Barclay, as
having differing views of life, and in the end of the narrative Alexander is
granted narrative preference - he gets a "happy ending" as it were - and Barclay
receives the opposite, there are two interpretations that can be drawn about the
narrative's subtext: that the narrative is attempting to illustrate the
Alexander is correct, or that it is attempting to illustrate that Barclay is.
From just this description, it is more reasonable to provisionally select the
first interpretation, since it explains all the data that we have so far.
However, if we go further and say that Barclay is portrayed as a better person
in some way - handsomer, more well-liked, acting more morally, or even just
heroic music plays when he is on screen - then one might instead select the
latter message, with the added caveat or complication that another part of the
subtext is that those who are right do not necessarily always get what they
deserve. Now, the first interpretation actually explains far less of the data,
and requires more tenuous justifications for why Barclay gets the more heroic
portrayal (perhaps the dyed-in-the-wool Alexander fans might say that it is just
a mistake on the part of the artist, or it is meant to be satirical, even though
it portrays none of the hallmarks of satire.)

## other types of art

There are a number of other species of artistic outflowing, which loosely fall
under the second type of art, in that it represents something to do with the
axiology of the observers through its narrative, instead of through the
circumstances of its creation. Among these other species there are several
important points - not the only things of importance, but the things most
massive and noticeable on the horizon of aesthetic theory.

## evocative art

There is another aspect of art which is perhaps even more important in function
than any of the others up till now discussed, which is embodied in that
perennial painting, the landscape: that aspect of art which draws out *longing*
from the audience - a desire which they did not have before the artist, by
showing them the beauty and power of a certain kind of state of being, evoked in
their hearts a longing.

This type of art, beyond all others, is perhaps the most potent, for the simple
reason that, instead of satisfying the desire for a certain kind of fulfillment,
as the second type of art does above, or spurring audiences on along the path
they already follow like the first, it diverts its audience along a new path,
opening up new vistas of striving and achievement - which is the essence of
fulfillment - that they might not have truly been aware of before. This kind of
art can remake a man, or a society, through its force. It says: "It is time to
move beyond that which you have already been doing. Do something daring. Be
brave. Innovate."

Even if it does not spur each member of its audience to action, there is still
an incontrovertible benefit to evocative art: it helps even those who do not
change their course to understand those that do, or those who have already for a
long time pursued a different course. It broadens the mind and heart.

## empathic art

Another essential component of the multifaceted, fractal thing that is art,
perhaps the deepest and most complex mode of thought and product of which the
human mind is capable - even philosophy, which I have sunk many hours into
pondering, is capable by choice only of examining the nature of things through
the use of one level of textual understanding - is empathetic art. The
empathetic narrative shares its form often with evocative art, in that it
attempts to show some alternate thing from that which the observer is already
capable of comprehending and following, something which is not already part of
their past, present or future trajectory. But here, empathetic art is not often
an aspirational thing, asking others to follow what it represents: instead, it
asks others to *understand* some *specific* path - not to follow some general
route - and in this way to broaden their horizons.

Empathetic art often takes the form of a biography of some sort, which
represents the path through life or some event of a single or some number of
people, not by way of injunction to follow in their footsteps, or even
necessarily to *value* their course - over others or not - but instead so that
an understanding between kinds of people, across specific barriers of time and
place, can be reached, to expand the horizons of understanding and
universalization between peoples.

Empathetic art evokes an intense experience of inhabitation and understanding
between the observers and those who the narrative shows, allowing them to
comprehend each other on a deeper level than a simple interaction could allow.
This makes the connections between these people tighter - between the people
pictured and those similar, and between those who have now learned this new
thing. But this is not the only thing that empathetic art facilitates: this
broadening by one class of the intense empathetic feelings is not possible to
extend to every human being in the world - the intensity, the experience, the
vast multitudinousness of it would overwhelm and fill to bursting the
great-hearted soul who would try such a thing; however, there is another method
open to the human psyche: that of universalization: the extension of something
like empathy, but lacking that deep emotional connection, which is made more
likely, more possible, exercised by the experience of the expansion of emotional
connection.

Universalization encompasses the willingness to consider the struggles of
others, to expand one's horizons to include them, to consider how one's actions
affects them - and this, for all those whom we do not directly experience
*emotional attachment to.* The ability to expand horizons, to inhabit the eyes
and heart of another person and to comprehend them, is of paramount importance
to the human race: this capability of universalization, even without the intense
and intimate component of *empathy*, which is impossible to extend totally, is
what allows humans to overcome differences and live in societies.

For what am I if I cannot and will not examine and consider others, if I do not
have a deep emotional connection to them? How can we construct a society of
those who will not think outside their tribe and are not willing to ask
themselves: "what of that other over there, how is he effected by what I am
doing? Would I like that done to me?" This is, after all, the core of the Golden
Rule (and all the other rules that precede it).

## speculative art

There is one final type of art, which falls once more under the shadow of the
second wing of the central artistic dichotomy - art that is valued for its
process, and art that is valued for its narrative - and that is speculative art,
itself cleft into two, its own dichotomy: normal speculative art, and cautionary
art.

Speculative art is often wrong. It is Cassandra with her curse, but without her
prophetic vision - it cries out and is ignored, *rightly*, because its authors,
for all their foresight, do not have sight beyond vision. They are still mere
humans, chained to the living moment, unable to spread infinite membraneous
wings and wheel above the crystalline structure of existence.

Speculative art is often right. It is a heuristic Delphic oracle, generated by
the thousand million evolutionary and emotional and intellectual intuitions of
authors who spend a lifetime peering into the knotlike topology of future
history, teasing at the threads and muttering "what gong does this rope ring?"

Part of the purpose of speculative art is to explore. It is like sending authors
like scouts out into the No Man's Land of warring futures to map out the
territory before us. But the map *is not ever the territory*, and the future
they explored is then changed by that very extrapolation; Heisenberg's
uncertainty principle does not apply only to particles.

Speculative art asks the observers to consider a route to a certain future, to
understand the causal model that exists in the author's mind - something which
must be constructed with great care and thought, if the warning is to be
correct - and to examine the future. It asks them "Is this future acceptable?
And if not, look: this is how we could arrive there. We must stay off that
path." Speculative art and speculative art are the predictive engine of society,
as explained above, a great heuristic evolutionary intellectual mental engine
with all its energies bent forward and into the present, tendrils seeking data
and intuitive warnings expand across our world, and then, when the data is
collected (more than any centralized organization could possibly manage, and
more viewpoints on it), it is projected hypothetically into the future, encoded,
and returned to society for examination and evaluation.

Part of speculative and its subtype, cautionary, art is its entertainment
component - this is not an aspect which *always* exists, it is not a necessary
detail to this concept I am explaining - which is the "spoonful of medicine
which allows the medicine to go down": it is important to allow the predictions
and causal models from these wide-ranging perspectives to percolate into the
consciousness of the wider society, so that different understandings and
interpretations and actions based on these ideas can result in a feeding of the
prescient machine, but also can enact change in the present.

## the power of symbol

A symbol is a non-real object contained within an artistic artifact which
represents not just a thing like itself, but also another concept which shares
some relation-concepts, details or structural features that allow the observer
of that art to pick out what that symbol represents in their own conceptual
framework.

Within the context of narrative - narrative which can exist even within something
static and singular, such as a painting - symbols allow a story to be about more
than just what is on the surface. Thus, the story can be about specific and
detailed hypothetical non-real objects, but it can also be about
non-hypothetical real objects and their relationships. This duality is vital in
lending art its power, in that it allows it to reach beyond philosophical
capability by portraying a complex and interwoven milieu and then embedding
conceptual relations within that, allowing the complexity of a simulated
hypothetical reality to imbue the message about non-hypothetical reality with
increased complexity.

Symbols are most often created consciously, as the creator of artistic narrative
breathes life into their conceptual creation, but in other stories - such as
myths and legends - it is unclear exactly how much symbology is consciously
created and how much is an outgrowth of the non-conscious: the human mind is a
pattern-seeker, observing and generating concepts with wild abandon, some of
them correct, some incorrect. Much of this is done consciously, especially as
the edifice of conceptual hierarchy is built up and conscious thought has more
tools to work with; much, however, is done non-consciously as well - through the
direct understanding of observation, interaction, trial, and error, in such a
way that these concepts exist before lasting memories themselves can be formed:
before, in fact, the conscious personality could possibly have accumulated, so
that they seem primordial and fundamental. These non-conscious concepts, better
called archetypes, represent important things learned and understood before the
conscious mind had the explicit toolkit to wrestle with what it was observing
and dealing with in its envelope.

These archetypes, pre-conscious or non-conscious concepts, can be communicated
through the use of myth and story directly to the pattern-seeker in such a way
that to get explicit conscious symbology (and from there, concepts) out of them
actually requires *more conscious effort* than directly understanding them. In
fact, part of the toolkit necessary to wrestle with these ideas, and especially
to *pick out** a symbology from stories, is accumulated itself over the course
and development of philosophy and psychology; before those things had
accumulated this understanding would not have been so possible, which was what
necessitated the creation of these stories in the first place - this is why all
myth is not philosophy explicitly.

Archetypes communicated through stories, because they are most easily understood
pre- or non- consciously, can sometimes be more efficient in communication, and
since they were formed not through explicit understanding of concepts but through
implicit generation of patterns through action/interaction, they are often
ingrained more deeply in how we act. However, this has a dark side: because it
is not well understood what these symbologies mean directly, it is difficult to
evaluate why they produced action that worked, and why that action worked at
all - meaning that it is difficult or impossible to know if it is possible, and
under what conditions it would be, that these actions could change based on
different situations; without a framework to assess archetypes and archetype
relations outside of those archetypes, there is no way to understand what they
mean translated explicitly, and why what they are communicating was or is
important. There is no causal model here. And without a causal model, again it
is impossible to know under what conditions these archetypes were true, and
under what changing conditions they may now be false. Therefore, now that we *do
in fact have* the conscious conceptual toolkit to unpack and assess these
archetype-carrying stories, we must make use of those to maintain fitness for
our *current* envelope.

**Nota bene:** when I say "archetype," it is as a synonym for pre-conscious or
non-conscious concept, meaning that they may represent more than what is
commonly thought of as an archetype - which is generally limited to characters
or narrative situations. My definition of archetype can contain archetypal
*rules* such as "thou shalt not kill" and archetypal *relations* such as respect
for elders.
