---
layout: post
title:  "Section 3 - Axiology"
date:   2020-06-2 10:07
categories: section
---

## metaphysical value

Value is not a material property that can be observed outside of the experience
of beings. It is not a property like "color" or "smell" that can be objectively
determined. After all, there is nothing about value that does not refer to *who*
it is of value *for* - is bread "valuable?" It depends on if anyone is hungry or
not. Value is not a concept of some form of object or detail, it is not
object-ive; it is a relation-concept conceived from the interaction between
outside objects *and actors with certain needs.* In a world where no conscious
beings existed, would books have value? There would be no one to read them, to
*who* to allow the *for* to make sense.

**Nota bene:** it might seem that books would still have value, because they
contain learning and represent effort or artistic talent, but that is only
because we are not truly picturing a world *without* consciousness to make use
of that learning, that talent, appreciate that artistry.

Therefore, one must examine the consciousnesses that actually experience things
like value, and put things to certain ends for which they value, to explain what
it is.

## a theory of psychological Value

Value is centered in action or hypothetical action: to value something is to
either act to achieve it, or to intend under hypothetical conditions to do so,
if only the conditions were right.

The hierarchy of values, the comparison between values which generates
differences in value, can be represented by the concept of opportunity cost;
whichever value is acted on to the possible or actual detriment of other values,
whichever value causes one to ignore all the other values cast aside in acting
towards it - opportunity cost - is the most valued value. Thus, part of the
"right conditions" considered in hypothetical action - conditional intention to
act - for a value is whether it will sacrifice values that one would rather act
for instead. You value something *even if* you would act to get it, if only you
didn't have to sacrifice a greater value, and you value something more if you
act to get it even if you would sacrifice other values for it.

This even applies to time: a value acted in the interest of now means that some
other values must be postponed until later - it becomes impossible or unlikely
to satisfy them now, and less likely that they will be satisfied at all, since
the future is uncertain.

So, to produce a hierarchy of values, one can start with the bottom-most value,
only acted upon when everything else has been satisfied, postponed to the
longest moment hence, and then ask: "what values are acted on *instead of* this
value?" And choose the lowest one that that question suggests, i.e. the one
which precludes the fewest other values itself, and then repeat the process for
each value: "what value can cause this value to be sacrificed?"

**Nota bene:** it is often difficult to define value. There might be other
definitions, but this is the one that seems most phenomenologically accurate and
self-evident in itself. It might be debated whether value can be quantified by
some sort of unit, such as "utils," but I would consider that debate to be
straying from my central purpose here. There is nothing inherent about value,
both how it guides the actions of other humans, and how we experience it, that
would seem to indicate that value is anything less or more than ordering, or
hierarchy.

## The Seat of Value

If value is indicated by action or the willingness to act as we have seen, then
the actor is the ontological location for value.

The thing that acts, or considers acting, is a consciousness. That is the thing
that generates action, that considers things - both internal and external - and
decides whether or not to act upon them. Since action and inaction - whether
actual or hypothetical - are the things that show value, a consciousness is the
thing that values.

Action not only indicates the presence of values: a lack of values precludes
action! For, if one did not value one state of being over another, why would one
act, thereby changing your state of being? If one did not at least value the
state of being "action" over the state of being "inaction," one would not act at
all. Thus, valuation provides the foundation for any action at all, and
especially for *choosing* between actions.

Hence, something which chooses to act, and chooses between actions, requires
values. Something which reacts only, which produces knee-jerk responses to
environmental stimuli, does not require values, for it does not ponder, choose,
and conceptualize actions. Only something which has internal - mental - concepts
of actions and states of the world can internally compare and contrast them, can
*choose*, and so only something which has mental conceptual processes requires
values in order to choose.

**Nota bene:** a genetically determined animal might seem to act in favor of
various states of the world, but they only react to stimuli; these reactions
have been programmed into their own genetic code so that they react in favor of
the states of the world that lead to the propagation of those selfsame genes.
There is no comparative apprehension and conceptualization of different states
of the world, and no comparison therein of actions - only action in favor of a
predetermined state of the world, which they have no choice in, and therefore
predetermined action, which I call reaction. Notice that, for very complex
species, it is possible for this reaction for a predetermined state of the world
to look as if there is consideration - but try asking an ape to consider that it
might be a better state of the world if he and his fellows went extinct. He
could not consider it, even if he could comprehend language! Only humans are
capable of such ideas.

**Nota bene:** if, externally, genetically predetermined reactions looked
identical to free action, as they often do, one must assume genetically
predetermined reaction, simply because it is the simpler, less involved
explanation, which requires nothing we do not already understand. Even for
humans, if we were an alien race descending from the heavens, we would have to
assume, until we could assure ourselves otherwise - through humans knowingly
acting in anti-evolutionary ways, for instance - that humans were not freely
acting creatures, but automatons. The only reason that we do not, in reality, is
that we each and every one of us *inhabits a human consciousness.* We know by
experience that there is at least some core of us that is not genetically
predetermined. Now, the universe might be deterministic (we have no way of
knowing, since the laws of object don't necessitate it, and even if they did,
the Object doesn't apply to everything, and in any case it would be stretching a
relation-concept we already know doesn't apply everywhere to the breaking point
to say everything was subject to Newtonian cause and effect) but that does not
preclude this definition of free action.

Now what, for *Homo sapiens* at least, is the most fundamental "object" that
creates concepts, chooses to act, and does comparisons? Well, it is the
individual human being. We are not a colony organism: we each proceed along our
own processes of doing these things. Interacting with others as we do so, yes,
but only through our own medium of self, as a consciousness communicating with
others as its own separate thing. We are not a hive mind, although emergent
crowd-behavior might look as if we are. Therefore, the seat of value is the
individual.

Values are only valuable, and only more or less so in relation to each other,
for an individual.

**Nota bene:** Communities do not exist ontologically in the envelope. A
community is a concept generated by the abstraction of the actual constituent
entities - which are what ontologically exist, and are separate - into a
collective symbol for means of easier communication and intellectual shorthand.
This is the same thing that we do for all physical objects, which are actually
composed of trillions of atoms, but which we refer to as singular entities as a
shorthand. However, there are key differences between physical objects and
communities which stem from the fact that communities are made up of
consciousnesses. As with all intellectual short hands, therefore, it must be
remembered that *communities do not exist, only individuals do.* Thus, when
speaking about the properties of a community, it is only technically correct to
say that a community-concept has the properties that *all* of its members have,
plus whatever relation-concepts, properties, or behaviors are emergent from the
actions of those individual ontic entities. It is common to speak of a community
concept as if it has the properties and states of being of its greatest number
of members, or its average member, but neither of these are correct since the
community-concept is an abstraction-generalization concept, supposed to
encompass by detail-elision multiple entities which may not share those traits -
thus, the entities that do not share those traits should either be excluded, to
allow the concept to be derived from the details properly, or the detail should
be elided, so that the concept is a proper abstraction. Furthermore, it is
extremely incorrect to attribute properties of individuals *in* a community to
the community as a whole. For instance, only individual consciousnesses decide,
choose, or think. Collectives, as they have no singular mind, only the mind of
their constituent members, do not. To attribute choosing, deciding, or thinking
to a community is therefore a fallacy of composition, an improperly constructed
concept: just because each individual in that composes a whole does X does not
mean that the whole does X. This would be like saying that since each subatomic
particle which composes a physical object has "spin," the chair also has "spin."

## the secondary hierarchy of values

So far I have simply described what value is and where it is located. I have
made very few deductive conjectures. However, now it is time to embark on a much
more difficult journey: what *causes* things to be valued?

There are two different senses for "cause" in this context: first, that which
causes us to consider something a value is the event external to ourselves, or
the thought-process internal, that leads to the addition of that value to our
list of values; alternatively, secondly, that which causes us to consider
something a value is the *reason for why that thing is worthy of pursuit.*

The first type of value-cause is contingent in the extreme: it depends on early
childhood and on every experience after that, it depends on happenstance and
random chance, it depends on every illogical and logical whim within the
passion-addled brain of a human consciousness. It is the jurisdiction of
psychology. Psychology is a complex and empirical study, which rarely turns up
anything solid nor anything general: it explains the mode, mean, and median, and
not the necessarily true; moreover, its methodology is exceedingly complex
because of the *eternal and irreducible complexity and contingency of the
emotional experience of living as a human.* It is outside the scope of this
work.

Conversely, the second type of cause, the teleology of value, can be
philosophically analyzed because it is not contingent on individual human
experiences. It is universal to human experience in its fundamentals. This is
because it depends on a secondary hierarchy of values, the hierarchy of
value-causes: like the life-cycle of a concept, the secondary hierarchy proceeds
from the more abstract to the more specific - although it is more natural in
this case to speak in the opposite direction. The secondary hierarchy proceeds
to the specific things in our lives that we act towards - a car, a job, that
food in the refrigerator - to the direct reason we value that thing - to go
places faster, to get money, to satisfy hunger - to the reason why we pursued
(valued) those reasons - to waste less time, to spend on hobbies, to continue
living. Onward and upward the ladder may go, and I intend to examine where it
ends.

If one were to pursue the secondary hierarchy of values as far as it would go,
to the highest value or values, the values by which all others are - to the
human consciousness at least - justified, what would we find there? It would
have to be something that is valued *for its own sake*. Something which does not
need another reason to be valued except that it is itself: a self-evident value.

There are many things that we consider to be valued for their own sake:
knowledge, friendship or camaraderie, love, wisdom, fulfillment, happiness. Each
of these is a candidate in this search for the "ultimate value," but we can weed
out the list of our contenders further: there are things that can be valued in
and of themselves, such as knowledge or (as we saw earlier) the satisfaction of
hunger (since it can be valuable to eat aside from the utilitarian goal of
maintaining life), but which are *also*, simultaneously, in service of a further
goal; these things are not as fundamental as those other things which they are
partially valued in pursuit of. They can be cast aside - by the laws of
the primary hierarchy of value - if there is another, better way of achieving
the goal they were pursued partly in virtue of, if by doing so some time is
saved or something else is conserved. If they can be cast aside, they are not as
much of value. But something which is for the sake of *only* itself? Something
which nothing else is pursued through the use of? That is truly the ultimate
value for the secondary and primary hierarchies of value.

Let us attempt to consider what this ultimate value might be. What do we value
*solely* for its own sake? The only answer is *fulfillment* - all other things
that we do or value, even "happiness," even things that do not bring us
"happiness," always rotate back around to this answer: "because I find
fulfillment (or satisfaction if you like) in it." This is always the answer. And
try asking yourself why you value having a fulfilling life? You can value things
that do not make you happy because they fulfill you, or lead to a fulfilling
life in the long run, such as learning difficult things or doing difficult
thankless work. But you do not value a fulfilled life for any reason but itself.
What possible reason could there be?

## Fulfillment and Happiness

Fulfillment is not happiness.

Fulfillment is a state of making use of your faculties to the fullest and
achieving something. Happiness is a state of euphoria.

Fulfillment is enduring, because it is a holistic state. Happiness is fleeting,
because it is an emotion - it becomes the new *expected baseline*, so that to
take away what once made you happy and now is part of your baseline only makes
you less happy then before that thing became part of your baseline.[^1]

Fulfillment is a state of continual action: one cannot make use of your
faculties, achieve, *live* without action. Happiness is a state of being which
requires no action.

One cannot always, or most of the time, be "happy." Life gets in the way.
Fulfillment comes from how you deal with life.

Happiness should not be the focus of striving. For then you will always continue
to strive, as each new level becomes the baseline. Happiness will become
something ever out of reach as you must continue to act, but action is not
happiness. Fulfillment is the act, is the pursuit, and is not infinite in
distance. It does not form baselines.

## human & animal faculties

What then is this state of action which composes fulfillment? What sorts of
abilities must one use to use your "faculties?" In what way? How much? For this,
we must examine a human being.

The faculties of any entity are the categories of action or thought of which it
is capable. One of a cheetah's faculties is running at 58 miles per hour, for
instance - but the faculties are of course not limited to just what is *unique*
about creature: a cheetah's faculties also include eating, which all animals do,
and other things which even primitive single-celled organisms do. Thus it is
with humans as well: we have uniquely human faculties, which are limited only to
*Homo sapiens*, but we also have apelike faculties, and even more animalistic
ones below that.

The animalistic faculties, such as eating and sleeping and mating are to a
large degree more intimately felt and more rousing urges than anything which our
"higher essences" can throw at us: when was the last time any man felt as much a
longing to sit down and do mathematics as he did to eat when he was truly
hungry? A starving man would not choose books over food. Thus there is no danger
of us neglecting our animalistic faculties, for they our the basic foundation of
what allows us to live in the first place. What needs to be taught is the use of
our human faculties, which are in constant danger of being neglected, like a
mute child.

It is only through the use and cultivation of human faculties that we have any
choice in our animal faculties: the animal faculties, forming the most urgent
impulse and the most basic need, are ever-present and all-powerful, and act
almost as they do in animals, an unconscious reaction seeking the genetically
predetermined state encoded in our ancestry. They cannot curb themselves, and
they act of their own accord.

If we wish to speak of the proper field of action for these "instincts," beyond
which point they tend to overthrow themselves in a fit of excess or in raging
ineffectuality against a situation unfamiliar to our genetic memories, we are
already in the realm of the purely human faculties of consciousness and
conscious control. I said "almost" above for a reason! The presence of a mind in
the equation changes the balance of power - there is a new tactician in play,
one who commands vast armies of his own: suddenly the instincts have a rival:
this is no longer a unipolar game.

Thus even to serve the animal instincts themselves, we must care about the human
faculties. But there is another reason entire: the consciousness which is the
well-spring of the purely human faculties (for, what other things do we have
uniquely ours? our bodies are those of apes, not unique) is *the thing which
experiences values*! The seat of the animal instincts does not feel anything
itself, only the thing which is the human faculty feels its gain or loss!
Therefore, if we care for how we feel, we must care about our faculties, since
that which feels and that which is the faculty is one and the same. This thing
also feels the satisfaction of the animal, yes, but that satisfaction is still
mediated through the filter of the consciousness - if the consciousness is
already unhappy through other reasons, it will filter unhappily too. One cannot
eat your way out of depression.

And how does this faculty feel? If left neglected, it will feel empty. If used
in action and selected values, it is freed and given fulfillment. One must *use*
the faculty that we have been given, to feed the thing that feels and values its
fulfillment.

## fulfillment as action

What capabilities must be exercised through action for the fulfillment of the
human essence *qua* human? Three, each drawing its unique manifestation from
that Promethean wellspring, consciousness: the social faculty, the rational
faculty, and the productive faculty. Each of these is made possible by the
rational consciousness of humans, in its human form: the social, in voluntary
cooperation mediated by rational discussion and common goals, instead of filial
allegiances and fear; the rational, in the understanding of the world and the
interaction and description of it properly; and the creative, in problem solving
and creation of new concepts only made possible by the first two.

Sociability: our rationality allows us to achieve a much more organized, broad,
and intense form of social life: while other species are indeed social, no other
species is capable of rational communication to plan ahead and achieve goals to
the degree that humans are. Other animals might communicate or even plan on the
basis of instinct, but our unique human abilities let us form huge and complex
hierarchies and cooperate at a high level. Furthermore, no other animal is
capable of voluntarily cooperating, not through familial ties or fear or
superficial likability, but through the true communication of common goals and
common benefit - no other animal can ascertain, as part of its interaction, if
it truly furthers its own values, and benefits itself from such a cooperation
with its fellows. True mutually beneficial, consensual cooperation is the realm
of only humans.

Creativity: humans are also the only creatures, thanks to our sociability and
conscious rationality, that are capable of working towards a value - modifying
the things in the natural world to an express purpose, long in advance and at a
highly complex level. Other animals might do this to a degree, like the
nest-making of birds or the tool-making of some apes, but the birds are acting
purely on instinct, and the apes act on direct empirical trial-and-error, not on
a true rational understanding (this is why they could not hope to achieve the
level of foresight and complexity of human achievements). The production of
things for the use of others, and the abstract understanding of principles
inherent to such production, and application of such principles to intellect and
cooperation, are purely human traits.

Rationality: the human species is the only one that seems capable of conscious,
explicitly logical or rational thought, and conceptual abstractions.
Furthermore, since humans do not have instincts nor an automatic knowledge of
how to do things, rationality is our fundamental means of survival; alone in the
envelope of consciousness a human must rely only on his own mind to understand
the world around him, the patterns in it, and what he must do.

## value once more

Thus the things we do value, ultimately, we value because they fulfill us -
partially; and moreover the things that we should value, ultimately we should
value for the fact that they fulfill us - totally.

Things that fulfill us allow us to achieve that state of being in life where we
can act to achieve our fulfillment, using our talents *qua* humans as well as
our unique talents, without undue suffering which prevents the appreciation of
such fulfillment, and allows occasional happiness - happiness itself is not an
anti-value, in moderation and within the proper framework.

[^1]: [Hedonic Treadmill](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Hedonic_treadmill)
