---
layout: post
title:  "Section 5 - Virtue"
date:   2020-06-2 10:07
categories: section
---

## self-interest, the seat of value, and fulfillment

If, as we discussed in [the section on axiology]({% post_url
2020-06-2-section-3-axiology %}), the seat of value - the ultimate arbiter and
experiencer of what is *valuable* - is an individual human being, it follows
then that what ultimately is "considered valuable" must be considered valuable
by the individual human being to whom that value is relevant. The only way it
can be generalized or made "objective" is to focus on the commonalities that
that human being necessarily has with others.

This might seem to open the door to relativism, and to a degree it does.
However, because there is an objectively true way to find fulfillment as a human
being, and because all human actions are taken in service of fulfillment whether
the human knows it or not, one can still say that some actions are "incorrect":
they do not serve the correctly understood goals of that human - i.e. the
rational, or enlightened, self-interest.

If there were no commonalities at all between humans, such that there was no
objective basis for human fulfillment, this claim of incorrectness would not be
possible; and even though it *is* possible to a degree, there are
fulfillment-pertinent differences between humans as well - temperament, skill,
and situation - which creations a situation in which there are aspects of the
correct pursuit of human fulfillment that are completely relative to a human, so
that they *cannot* be held as "incorrect."

Thus one can look at the actions of another human being and say: "you are
seeking and searching for something, but you do not know what it is - here are
its general outlines. These actions you are taking, because you did not know why
you were taking them, are acting against your true interests. As such, they are
incorrect, and it would be in your own interest to desist."

This means that, however, one can never ask another to subsume to your own
interest, or subsume yourself to another's interest, completely. There are many
situations, indeed most situations fit this description, where there are other
people who you care about, who it is in your enlightened self-interest to care
about, or people whose gains are also your gains - and that is perfectly
acceptable. However, you can never be asked, or ask yourself, to give up caring
about your own fulfillment at all: it is contrary to your nature, and will not
bring satisfaction. Instead, it eradicates your capability to function and value
as a human being. Someone else asking you to do so is asking you to cease your
function as a human. It can never be in your interest.

More importantly however, since one is always the seat of values *to you*, you
are the ultimate decider of what your values are - what your fulfillment is, how
it is to be achieved, what you care about. To borrow from others, or allow them
to dictate it, outside of the broad and general categories common to all humans,
is a dangerous game: for, it will never be totally accurate nor always in your
best interest. Others dictating your values for you will be tempted, and likely
eventually fall into the trap of, using that power over you to their own
advantage or the advantage of their own values which might be mutually-exclusive
with yours, either subconsciously or on purpose.

We must, then, in order to achieve true happiness and fulfillment as human
beings, always remain the ultimate decider of our own values: although we are
fallible and often mistaken as to what we truly want, and may oftentimes take
advice and seek wisdom, we must never surrender our capacity for experiencing
value and our rational faculty, which was "given to us" by our nature for the
purpose of seeking our own values. I would even say that, in fact, the very act
of using our minds to introspect and ascertain and seek what it is we truly
value is *part* of the fulfillment of our human essence, since the use of our
faculty of reason is part of that fulfillment, and this faculty is partly
designed for such things.

In addition, to believe that it is impossible to be truly fulfilled, or that we
do not have the capacity to deserve it, is to forfeit fulfillment right out of
the gate - to purposefully sacrifice any chance we might have had of finding our
own fulfillment - and to relinquish the search, so that the only way we could
end up fulfilled is through an accident, something we are likely ourselves to
throw away if we do truly believe we cannot deserve it.

**Nota bene:** when I say "deserve," that does not mean in the least that we all
deserve fulfillment without action on our own part - that is contrary to the
nature of individual fulfillment in the first place, but indeed is not the
definition I mean: when I say "deserve," it means that we have the capability to
earn our fulfillment (and continue earning it, since action is part of it), that
it is *not impossible* to earn one's fulfillment. Thus, to say: "everyone
*deserves* fulfillment" in the colloquial sense is to say that everyone, no
matter what they have or have not done should have fulfillment - whereas I say:
"everyone *can deserve* fulfillment," meaning: there is nothing in the nature of
humans that should *keep them* from deserving it, *if they take the proper
actions.*

To relegate fulfillment to another life is to destroy any possible fulfillment
in this one: to make ourselves and those around us unhappy *on purpose,* to
sacrifice the only thing we know we have for something we have no way to know is
coming.

## rationality as the center of fulfillment and self-interest

As discussed in the previous section as well, there are multiple aspects to
human fulfillment, all of which must be exercised to some degree for complete
fulfillment, but each of which can be followed as a route to what we desire.
However, it must be stressed again that the *starting place* for all this - the
thing that values, the thing that experiences, and the faculty that dictates the
nature of our fulfillment - is the *mind*: the *human mind.* And what does the
human mind do that animals' does not? What is its unique feature: nothing but
rational, conceptual thought - it is the pattern-seeker, the world-seer, the
builder, the mariner of conceptual seas!

Therefore before anything else can be done, we must use our conceptualizing
minds, we must make proper detail-elisions from the world around us and the
observations we make, understand the concept-relations that are the weaving in
the fabric of the envelope. That is the beginning. It is the first step to all
other steps.

Note that part of this *rationality*, this faculty for pattern-seeking, for
thinking, for conceptualizing, may not imply strict Aristotelian rationality:
for, when we recognize through our observations that that is *not* the correct
manner of understanding the commonalities between observed objects and their
relation-concepts, then we should discard it as necessary: this rationality
would allow for the understanding and use of Quantum Mechanics, for instance. It
is the action of conceptualization.

## the tools of fulfillment: virtue

What we call "virtues" are specific behavior-patterns that guide the exercise
of the basic faculties in a proper way, functioning as prerequisites for other
further fulfillment. There are perhaps almost as many virtues as there are
people, considering the wide interpretability of the three fulfillment-aspects
of human beings that I listed previously, so that it might be easier to list
only what is *not* a virtue - nevertheless, I will endeavor to illustrate what I
consider to be the central virtues. I will attempt to select from the list of
Aristotalian virtues, since Aristotle's Virtue Ethics is the wellspring of my
inspiration on the matter. Again, the list of virtues is not limited to these -
these are *merely examples* for further consideration and extrapolation.

1. Justice - the application of reason and by extension universalizability - as
   we will see later - to the area of human affairs apportioning to what reward
   or punishment each should be accorded, and the judging of when it is within
   the authority of the virtuous human to meet out that reward or punishment.
2. Truthfulness - the application of reason rigorously and with no purposeful
   blindness, to all matters at hand, without self- or other- deception.
3. Modesty and Self-Esteem - the application of reason rigorously and with no purposeful
   blindness to oneself, to find a balance between honestly assessing one's
   flaws and communicating them, and needlessly tearing oneself down so that one
   believes that they are no longer worthy of fulfillment.
4. Wit and Charisma - the application of reason, through rhetoric, to one's
   interactions with others on a more superficial level, to understand how one
   should act towards others: timing and manners, among other things.
5. Ambition - this is part of the drive, mentioned in the virtue of Self-Esteem,
   that motivates one to actually reach for the goals one has selected in
   keeping with your personal fulfillment. Someone who lacks ambition totally is
   inert and of no use to anyone. They are not truly productive of anything new.
6. Productivity and Hard-Workingness - these are a direct outgrowth of the human
   ability to create: no human is complete as simply a *consumer*.
7. Peacefulness - this is an outgrowth of the social aspect of humanity: we are
   not animals that hit other people and take their stuff simply because we can.
   We do not abide by the law of the jungle - for we left the jungle behind
   millennia ago. 
8. Temperance - knowing how to govern oneself, through the use of your mind, to
   overcome those animalistic urges which, while they must be satisfied to a
   degree, should not be *indulged.*
9. Equanimity - applying rationality to the world around you, to understand what
   you can and cannot control. This is the Stoic virtue, and only one among
   many.
10. Benevolence - This is not a uniquely human virtue insofar as many animals,
    nearly all of them, in fact, have been observed to act altruisticaly and
    benevolently. However, this is a prosocial behavior, which can be combined
    with the other meta-virtues to better serve the human faculties through
    reciprocal behavior and building social relationships for better future
    voluntary interaction
   
**Nota bene:** it is impossible to stress enough that this is not a complete
list of virtues. Not even the half of it! Nor is this a complete list of every
aspect or manifestation of each of the virtues listed - even that would take too
long. This is why I began with the three central meta-virtues of humanity:
peaceful social cooperation, calm rationality and intelligence, and
productiveness - these are the true and most complete description of the
virtues of a human, from which all others can be derived.
