---
layout: post
title:  "Section 1 - Phenomonology"
date:   2020-05-31 14:25:08 -0700
categories: section
---

## The Existence of the External World

Consciousness only exists in virtue of being conscious *of* something; something
which exists prior to or outside of the consciousness itself, since to be
conscious of itself without a prior subject is to be conscious of something
which has not come into being yet, i.e. is impossible. This "something" then is
prior to and external to consciousness and clearly not controlled by it - we
would know if reality was controlled by our own perceptions of it - so, whatever
its metaphysical origin (material, ideal, monadic, an evil daemon), we can call
it "the world."

Whether it is truly real, it is an external fact which we must act in accordance
with, so its philosophical reality is immaterial - literally.

## Detail-Elision Theory of Concept-Formation

How do we understand and speak about this world? (The two are really the same:
how do you truly understand that which you are not capable of explaining?)
Through firstly the use of concepts. Concepts are formed through the intimate
interaction between consciousness - which we know is a pattern-seeker - and its
envelope; they represent patterns of objects that are similar: this they do by
selecting the unchanging aspects of the objects and eliding the changing or
unimportant details. For example: "dog" and "cat** are concepts formed by the
elision of some details of the real-world objects.

**Nota bene:** concepts cannot be formed unless one has two or more examples of
the class of object one wishes to categorize - both for the concept to be
useful, and for it to be possible for one to know which details are important or
unchanging among the class, and which are not.

Which concepts are chosen by the pattern-seeker of consciousness depends on
which ones are more useful categories for thinking in the environment around the
consciousness; this is why discussion is so important: sharing concepts that
were formed by one group, which had not been formed by the other, with the
other, in its station as interlocutor.

## Reference Theory of Meaning

Speaking of discussion, this leads me to language. Language is formed by words
and sentences; I am interested here, initially, in words and verbs - words which
by virtue of reference are meaningful.

What gives words their reference-meaning? The agreement between pattern-seekers
who use that word. An arrangement of syllables does not, after all,
spontaneously acquire meaning in our minds simply by virtue of its innate sound.
Just look at a truly foreign language and ask yourself if any of these words
mean anything to you by themselves - and you will see what I mean. It is not the
word itself, but the "linguistic tacit contract" of a society that grants
reference (and thus **meaning**) to words.

**Nota bene:** Once this contract is established, of course, it can be made
explicit throught he use of dictionaries, but *not* before.

But what do these words refer to? Proper nouns refer to specific things with no
detail purposefully elided, but otherwise these words *refer* to concepts.

## The Method of Concept Abstraction

This might seem somewhat limiting at first - a roundabout way of reinventing
Wittgenstein or logical positivism - since words seem now to have to refer only
to classes of physical things (or events), but this is why I must now introduce
a complication: concepts (which words refer to) may also be formed by a
detail-elision applied to other concepts, so that all concepts are based
ultimately on reality, but at many possible *levels of abstraction.* So from dog
and cat to mammal, vertebrate, and then animal.

## Sense & Reference

Another complication is necessary, this time to the meaning of words themselves:
words have not only reference but sense to contribute to their meaning; sense is
what a word contributes to a statement beyond its actual reference, and also
what the speaker thinks *about* the referant of the word.

An example: Oedipus' mother, Jocasta, and Oedipus' wife (tragically) all refer
to the same person - the same concrete concept, we might say - but they seem to
mean different things because they contribute different ideas about referant.

Another example: the morning star and the evening star are the same star, but
each word has a different surrounding context for the speaker, so they carry
different sense.


## Statements and the Concept Theory of Conjunctions

What about sentences, then? What are they in relation to this structure of
meaning? They are relations: they relate the situation or meaning of the
concept-words that they are composed of using other more general concepts, which
we call operators or conjunctions; these conjunctions are formed by eliding
details about the specific situation and objects of certain common relations
which we observe between objects int he world outside.

Among these we find: cause and effect, simultaneity - our entire sense of time,
in fact - and also the operations known as the laws of logic, which represent
perhaps the most abstract concepts of all.

## Analytic & Synthetic

As Kant says, there are two different kinds of relations between concepts, which
he termed "analytic" and "synthetic": analytic sentences are those that explain
or spin-out the implications of concepts themselves, showing how other concepts
result from them or are contained within them already - a bachelor is unmarried,
to use a cliche example - while synthetic statements examine the relationship
between two concepts separately derived - such as that the street is wet after
it rains - a relationship which is usually not necessary in all cases, since the
relationship must be observed separately from either concept.

## The reliability of the senses

We have no innate knowledge, and no rational knowledge, no mode of knowing, that
our senses accurately report the envelope - the non-controllable reality
external to us, whatever it metaphysically is. All we know is what seems true to
us: it seems that there is a world out there ontologically separate from any of
us, and it seems like this or that.

### The external senses

This has led many to say that we must assume some basis which would allow us to
"get to" the reliability of the senses in order to get anywhere. I say that that
is not true: we can know that the senses are reliable insofar as they continue
to allow us to act in ways that seem beneficial: and since this seeming is our
only interaction with the world, it only matters that things *seem* beneficial
in any case. Thus, one can trust the senses as long as they "continue to work
for you."

And sometimes we have experienced situations where our senses have failed us
temporarily: where they led us to seemings that precluded our action towards
situations that "seemed" beneficial to us, so that when we awoke later we
realized our mistake. We cannot trust the senses completely anyway: we already
all only do what I say above, in trusting the senses as long as they allow us to
act in a way that is beneficial to us, and distrusting them when and insofar as
they do not. We can stop trusting them completely as soon as it turns out that
they do not allow us to act in any way commensurately with themselves, such that
they told us one thing, but when we acted on it they showed to us that that
action did not work - picture a man who is hallucinating, thinking that he is in
a hallway, when really he is running into a wall: he will feel that wall, or the
prevention from being able to move.

And if all senses, including all bodily processes that we sense, did not
contradict, but all simultaneously transferred to producing a totally other
picture, we would have no choice but to go along with it, for there would be no
inner contradiction: but we could always keep an eye out for one, as we do in
all situations, as skeptics.

Therefore, the senses are "reliable" only insofar as they allow us to act in
ways which allow us to move towards situations that are more beneficial to us,
or at least allow us to react to situations in ways that mitigate harm to us,
and as long as they do not contradict themselves. Assuming the reliability of
the senses totally is *actually incorrect!*

### The internal senses

The correctness of the external senses is determined by whether the are
consistent among themselves - one knows if one's eyes are seeing wrong, if one's
sense of pain or touch denies what you are seeing - and whether they can allow
correct action - if your senses tell you to do one thing, but then when you try
to do it, it turns out that the situation was otherwise - which are all
ultimately measures of how well our senses interact with the envelope *within
which we exist and act*, but my internal sense of fulfillment does not have any
of these external ideas: it is not connected to an envelope - it *stands for
itself*.

While the senses *stand for* an envelope, with a few methods of checking if they
are "serving their purpose" or "useful," the internal sense of fulfillment does
not *stand for* anything: it simply represents how fulfilled one is. Therefore,
if the senses are not registering - not connected to - something, then that is
an aspect in which they are wrong. However, if the inner sense of fulfillment is
not connected to something - or rather, if that thing is not connected to *it* -
then that does not make the sense of fulfillment wrong: it makes that thing not
pertinent.

For example: if my sense of fulfillment is not connected to some metaphysical
soul, then it is simply not connected to it - the one does not matter to the
other. However, if my senses are not cognizant to such a thing, then my senses
"are not correct" in that area.

**Nota bene:** if something is totally disconnected from any sense, so that even
when one takes an action it does not influence how your senses assess the
success of that action, then it *does not exist* for all intents and purposes.

This means that one can trust one's deepest internal "compass" of
moment-to-moment fulfillment, since by definition it cannot be mistaken. This
does not mean, however, that one's ideas about what *in the future* will make
one well off cannot be mistaken; furthermore, it does not preclude the fact that
oftentimes humans will suppress aspects of their fulfillment-compass, so that
they are not aware of them consciously. However, this suppression still
continues to cause changes in fulfillment that they do notice: after all, if
something could be totally deleted from influencing the compass of fulfillment,
so that it did not matter anymore, what would it matter that this was done, to
the person who had done it? The problem with suppression is that it makes one
wrong about future states of fulfillment and true current states - that is the
only problem with it - meaning that the compass is still trustworthy to
ascertain the true state.

### Assumptions

Thus, we only need provisionally, as long as it does not contradict itself, or
lead to inability to act - inconsistent world-state transitions - accept the
validity of the senses, and hence other things, which we will go on to cover.
However, we can rely on our internal sense of fulfillment in order to guide our
actions and what *is* "useful."

## Developmental Theory of Reality

Observing the seeming-envelope outside, in light of this, it seems that we are
in a situation with certain biological and natural laws. These seem to
reinforce, if we are correct in their seeming, the reliability of the senses and
mind, to a degree: therefore, our senses are not in contradiction, but
compatible - they seem at least to confirm their own general reliability; it
would indeed be a significant problem if our senses confirmed instead their
total unreliability.

Unlike Kant, I do not think that there are any real concepts which we need to
perceive at all; infants come into the word not yet comprehending basic things
such as object permanence, time, or cause and effect, or even the laws of logic
(this is why peek-a-boo and such simple games are a delight to them**, but learn
them through experience of reality.

This is not to say that we are *tabula rasa* - far from it! For, we come into
being primed with a mechanism of forming concepts and learning language.

How do we know that our concepts and thought-patterns are capable of being
correct, if they are derived through the faulty mediation of the sense and our
fallible minds? We know that we do make mistakes often, but if our knowledge
capabilities were entirely divorced from reality they would be of no use to us.

We evolved in an environment where something so resource-consuming as a large
brain capable of complex thought like the one we of the *Homo* genus developed
was a huge disadvantage. We would not have developed it, and would certainly not
have maintained it, unless it was of some benefit to us - and moreover! of a
great benefit to us: enough to make up for the calorie loss and the difficulty
in birthing which causes greater mortality rates in mothers and children.

How did this great big brain help us, then? If it was useless for guiding
action, it would do nothing for us in the action-filled world of nature. No, it
guides action, and usefully, too. Usefully means: in accordance with reality.
And how does it guide action? By forming general concepts and applying them. So
incorrectly formed concepts might work in the situation in which they were
formed, but they would not work even in a similar situation - wrong concepts
would the creation of "over-fitting" and would work only in the situation where
they were observed, not the situation with similar enough features that correct
concepts would apply.

We developed also in an environment where correct action was needed to survive
and incorrect action was harshly punished, so that those whose ability to form
concepts wasn't good enough, who formed them too few or too incorrectly, died
quickly, while those better succeeded and passed their genetic code down.

Thus over time, through the pressures of a reality which punishes acting against
its logic, because our concepts mediate our interaction with reality and thus
our actions, and because our actions were the arbiter of our survival and
development through reproduction, the capability for understanding the world
correctly - so that we could act correctly - was born.

Evolution does not produce anything perfect, however, so we are saddled with
cognitive biases: relation-concepts such as *post hoc ergo propter hoc* and
confirmation bias, which we used confidently in our reasoning because they
seemed correct to use, because it wasn't necessary for our survival for
evolution to cull them.

However, when we learned that these fallacies were not compatible with our more
basic and useful relation-concepts, and when we learned further, using tools we
ourselves developed consciously - using our concept formation utility against
its natural progenitor - that these concept-relations did not guide action well
and truly, we cataloged them and put up WANTED signs for them, to remind
ourselves often to avoid them. Thus we have a self-correcting faculty.

## The "OBJECT"

Through this connection to reality which I have described, we can with time know
which parts of our concept group apply to reality and us, and which only seem
to. That is how we can know that reality acts by logic: the common features of
objects, which we carefully and correctly observe, which form the concept of
Object itself, to us necessitate the action of the Laws of Logic, and these
general conceptual features are so general that they would apply to any object
whatever that we would recognize as an object - we know from the details of the
concept of Object that the laws of logic are true for it, and thus for
everything in our world.

Let me explain it another way: we have a method of, when we are careful,
correctly abstracting concepts, first from our empirical experiences, and
thence from each other. If we proceed up a hierarchy of concepts formed from
detail-elision, to the very top of what we would recognize as a concept that
could be unambiguously applied to objects in the world, to the most abstract
thing that still has ontological and material being, we call this concept
Object.

This concept itself, still contains a few details. Very few indeed, but I
profess that I could count three among them, that anything which we could
recognize as "real" must follow:

1. The Law of Non-Contradiction
2. The Law of Identity
3. The Law of The Excluded Middle

Note that I only use Aristotle's Three, and do not give Schopenhauer his fourth,
the principle of Sufficient Reason, which can be stated thusly: "Of everything
that is, it can be found why it is." This is not obvious to me, nor can it be
justified in my framework of the Object.

Anything within this Universe, which has physical reality as we recognize it,
must follow these laws. Thus, reality is rational: I can be sure that any
object, so long as it has a physical nature, will follow these rules, no matter
what it is or whether it is known or unknown - and no matter where it is
located, since the actions of the object found come from details in itself
abstracted out to the level of the Object, not details of its surrounding
envelope.

As an example: I can be assured that if I were to land on another planet, I
would find that the planet is not also an egg. It would follow the law of
Identity. I would find that it either exists or does not exist. It would follow
the law of non-contradiction and the law of the excluded middle. I do not need
to worry, as Lovecraft does, that at some remote region of space, all laws break
down - for, space itself is an entity under the heading of the concept Object,
and anything that I would find there that was physical, which I could interact
with and perceive, would fall under the heading of Object as well.

Most spiritual objects would also follow these three laws, meaning that it would
be possible for them to fall under the concept of Object, however, there are
some concepts that do not, such as the Christian Trinity. Thus, I will restrict
my notes here to simply physical things, which are all that we have direct sense
of in reality anyway.

Of course, this notion does not entirely rule out some strange otherworldly
metaphysical plane, which since it would not have physical reality in common
with the other objects which we used as the empirical basis for our derivation
of the Object, would not have to follow logical rules. But it would not be
located in spacetime, but would necessarily be located in some orthogonal
universe, and I would raise the question of whether we could interact with or
perceive of objects that Object does not apply to.

We can - as I said before - conceive of such objects, but only at an extremely
abstract level, without true understanding like what it would require to truly
conceptualize what it would be like to interact with such a thing; the Christian
Trinity, for instance, is "understandable** at a highly abstract level, as being
three person that are in actuality one person, but no Christian truly
comprehends what this means: they simply string words together, and comprehend
aspects, not the whole concept.

**Nota bene:** the laws of identity and non-contradiction are fundamental for
the operation of thought and communication at all, even though they are not
totally ontologically certain, and as I have said can partially be conceived
otherwise. This is why they are "axioms" which cannot be denied without first
being assumed in the denial: in fact, even the thoughts which attempt to
perceive if these laws are otherwise for specific objects use these laws for the
understanding and description of these objects. I am not at this moment totally
certain how this frames the notion of the Object concept, except to posit that
perhaps the reason these ideas are so fundamental to our thought is because they
are so fundamental to reality (as we have seen, our thought is connected to
reality) and concepts *qua* concepts (as we have seen). Maybe these are so baked
into our minds because of how baked into our reality they are.

## A Priori concepts

One implication of all this is that there is no such thing as a truly *a priori*
concept - if there was, it would not possess any necessary connection to
reality.

Instead, most things that seem *a priori* are simply highly reified and
culturally/socially imparted or empirically experienced with phenomonological
force (see section two) rule-concepts relating to the Object.

The rest of *a priori* ideas, such as they are - and it is a small burden to
bear for the concept of *a priori* - are derived from the experience of
ancestors through the mediator of action and the scorekeeper of development.

This means that rationalism, proceeding from one proper concept to another in a
manner commonly referred to as *a priori* synthetic, is simply the working-out
of the most fundamental emperical truths we are capable of grasping; *a priori*
synthetic truths are thus just as - and likely more - related to reality as
scientifically determined observations, and more likely to give a correct causal
model of what is happening "behind the curtain of experience." We will speak of
these things more in depth later, though.
