---
layout: post
title:  "Section 2 - Epistemology"
date:   2020-05-31 14:25:08 -0700
categories: section
---

## Rational & Correct Knowledge

Rational knowledge is knowledge ordered by the laws of the Object concept - i.e.
ordered by logical hierarchies of concepts and logical relation-concepts between
them through the laws of logic.

**Nota bene:** a "logical" hierarchy is one in which there are no loops, or
higher-up concepts that add incorrect details, etc - the hierarchy of concepts
must be formed strictly. An example: the fallacy of composition performs a
conceptual step up the ladder of abstraction by grouping several assembled
concepts of objects together in a single entity. However, it adds details from
its constituent concepts which are not present in a proper common grouping
concept. For example: a "car" is a grouping-concept relating the concepts of
"wheel," "tire," "body,** and so on. To say that a tire is rubber, therefore the
entire car is rubber, is to commit the fallacy of composition and construct a
hierarchy that is not logical, because it adds a detail to the grouping concept
which all the other concepts that form it do not have, meaning that the grouping
concept is not strictly a detail-elision, but partly a detail addition.

Correct knowledge is knowledge which, as well as being rational, rightly
integrates relations and details from the consciousness' envelope about the
concepts which one desires to describe with that body of knowledge.

**Nota bene:** there is a strange "loop" affect to these two concepts of
knowledge, due to the fact that, technically, the laws of logic that rational
knowledge must observe are observed by the consciousness in its envelope in the
form of the Object, so that abstractly speaking rational knowledge is just
knowledge which "rightly integrates the relations and details" of the Object as
it is observed in "from the consciousness' envelope." Yet, for any other
knowledge to be correct, since all other concepts "descend" from the Object,
that other knowledge must observe the rules of the Object first before it can
continue to be correct in its own specific way.

## Inconsistent knowledge

The primary and first rule that all actions must follow is the law of
non-contradiction, and so, since correct knowledge is judged primarily by
action, knowledge must also follow this rule. Inconsistent knowledge must be
tossed aside.

Inconsistent knowledge is not knowledge at all. It does not indicate which prong
of the contradiction should be selected, and it cannot provide an underlying
causal model of both aspects at once. Inconsistent knowledge must be reconciled,
or it is undecidable.

## proper causal models

A causal model explains what conditions or actions produce other conditions -
thus, the action "pushing this ball" produces the condition "this ball is
rolling." Causal models take the form of relation-concepts between objects,
where which relation-concepts that can be applied - and what the specific
manifestation of the relation-concept is - is determined by, as usual, the
details of the concepts being related. This is like the notion of an concept's
(or object's) actuality, its current details, and its potentiality, the
relation-concepts which that actuality allow to be applied.

We need correct knowledge with a correct causal model because only a causal
model can present the mechanism of action and reaction an understanding of which
is necessary to guide action: if one does not know what results - or even, at an
extreme, what *possible* results - actions have, how can one choose between them
to achieve results? How can one act with any logic other than randomly?

One might say "I will act randomly in order to *find out* what these actions
do." This is what babies do, and in a way what scientists do as well - we will
discuss that subject later - but that is random action in the pursuit of
*forming* a correct causal model. I.e. it is admitting that ultimately a correct
causal model is important. One cannot go without one forever, willfully ignoring
the causes and effects one sets in motion, and be said to be acting other than
randomly and thus without hope of causing anything desired to come about. One
cannot, in fact, survive at all that way.

Thus correct knowledge is required for action in pursuit of any goal - i.e. for
living - in the long run.

## expanding knowledge

Furthermore it is universally a proper and beneficial endeavor to expand and
test a causal model and rational knowledge: to test, because one must know where
the blind-spots of a model are - what it does not explain, does not predict, or
predicts incorrectly - to know how to improve it, but also to avoid acting
incorrectly and to avoid being surprised by outcomes; to expand, because more
far-reaching causal models don't only make action-outcomes better known
beforehand and thence allow better action, but because this expansion opens new
and unpredictable avenues of knowledge themselves.

## stable & unstable equilibria

Reality - the structure of it, by virtue of the essence/concept of the Object -
is, as we have discussed previously, governed by the laws of logic. If A is
true, A is indeed the case; and if A is the case, B cannot also be the case at
the same time and in the same way; and further: either A is the case or it is
not. Moreover, if A and B are mutually exclusive but mutually cover the whole
space of possibilities, C cannot be the case, and so on.

All this does not in the least mean, however, that reality must be *interacted**
with in perfectly logical ways - otherwise all action would necessarily be in
line with reality, or correct, and there would be no need for learning, since we
would all be omniscient, at least about the laws of nature - one can indeed act
as if B is true, even if A is. One can act as if the laws of logic do not apply:
as if an A is not an A, or as if a B is an A, or as if there are no As nor Bs.

**Nota bene:** all except the law of Non-Contradiction. This law is special, in
that one cannot actually act as if two contradictory things are true *at once*:
if A entails action X, and B Y, one cannot do both X and Y at the same moment.
Of course, in the real course of events there might be a middle-of-the-road
action, seemingly. But this is only true for two structures: one, if the third
action (Z) is a compound action, part of which is correct for A and part for B;
or two, if there is a spectrum from A to B. One can at various times act as if A
is true, and various other times as if it is B that is true, however, because
one holds both as true at once.

Although one can mistake reality conceptually - even so far as ignoring the LNC
in thought - and act mistakenly in light of these thoughts (since thought is an
ineradicable prerequisite for most action, and unconscious concepts for all
others), reality itself, being logical in essence, will re-assert itself.

Reassertion takes a myriad of forms, but generally: those actions not in line
with reality will fail - if predicated on a totally impossible conception,
totally; if on an only partially mistaken conception, partially (and often,
thanks to the subtility of knowledge, in strange and difficult-to-understand
ways.) Therefore a timeline of compound actions taken based on an erroneous
conception of reality will often - sometimes slowly, sometimes quickly,
sometimes with the hard abruptness of running into an immovable obstacle - begin
to cause problems for those in the vicinity of the actions as reality reasserts
itself: poisoning even actions taken correctly, either by making them difficult,
or placing reality in a state that makes the rational actions harsh indeed.

Hence, although acting incorrectly can, for a time, seem beneficial to those
effected, in the medium to long term it will come crashing down, or be reduced
to long and grinding ineffectuality, where great effort is expended simply to
beat reality back by occasionally acting rationally, and then reverting back;
this is an unstable equilibrium, and reality will tend over time to force all to
act in accordance with it in one way or another.

Acting against the logic of reality not only corrupts the timeline of action,
making life worse and actions ineffectual - it also hangs the Sword of Damocles
over the heads of the wrongheaded actors: they do not know when, if, or how,
they will run into an impenetrable wall and be dashed on the rocks of logic.
Thus, knowing - and knowingly acting - in tune with reality minimizes risks and
maximizes the long-run effectiveness of actions.

## The only way to "know"

A "proper" method of gathering knowledge is one that allows the apprehension of
concepts (relation and otherwise) concerning "objects" in the envelope of
consciousness in a way that yields either correct knowledge in broad strokes, or
yields concepts in a way that allows for the later correction of errors, or is
at least wrong in consistent ways that can be adjusted for. To go about
gathering knowledge "properly" means that the concepts and relations derived
from the process of inspecting the envelope of consciousness, the "outside
world," must not consistently or randomly be wrong with no hope of correction,
and are further guaranteed to have some connection to reality, and are not in
contradiction with the laws of the Object. Any method of gathering that falls
afoul of these rules is improper.

As I have said before, there commonly are considered to be two distinct methods
of knowing: *a priori* and *a posteriori*; however, as I mentioned in the
previous section, the phenomonological and epistemological methods by which I
derive my system preclude this distinction. Even seemingly *a priori* logic is
in fact *after*, or *post* experience. All knowledge is then brought under the
same heading: seemingly "pseudoscientific" - i.e. rational - knowledge, and
vaunted "empirical" or "scientific" knowledge. Both take observations about
reality and deduce from them according to the rules of the Object.

However, there is a small difference between ways of knowing which produces the
appearance of one or the other type of knowledge, *a priori* or *a posteriori*,
based on what the observations that are begun with are.

## "a priori" knowledge

